openssh: windows documentation added (#1257)
rug-cit-hpc/league-of-robots: roles/online_docs/templates/mkdocs/docs/logins-windows.md

 * SSH jump hosts popup window
    * 5: _Gateway host_ field: Use _**{{ first_jumphost_address }}**_ for the _Jumphost_ address.
    * Optional: _Port_ field: The default port for SSH is _**22**_ and this is usually fine.
      However if you encounter a network where port 22 is blocked, you can try port 443. (Normally used for HTTPS, but our Jumposts can use it for SSH too.)
    * 6: _Username_ field: Use your _**account name**_ as you received it by email from the helpdesk (same as for 3).
    * 7: Select _Use SSH key_ and

>     * 8: Click the small button to select the _**private key file**_ you generated previously (same as for 4).

Author: ```suggestion
    * 8: Click the small button to select the _**private key file**_ you generated previously (same as for 4).  
```

      **Important**: the path to the selected private key will be shown.
      Depending on how you browsed to the private key file, the path may

>         * Either start with a drive letter, colon and single backslash.

Author: ```suggestion
        * Either start with a drive letter, colon and single backslash.  
```

          E.g. ```H:\path\to\private_key.ppk```
          This is fine and should work.

>         * Or start with two backslashes.

Author: ```suggestion
        * Or start with two backslashes.  
```

>           E.g. ```\\path\to\private_key.ppk```

Author: ```suggestion
          E.g. ```\\path\to\private_key.ppk```  
```

 * SSH jump hosts popup window
    * 5: _Gateway host_ field: Use _**{{ first_jumphost_address }}**_ for the _Jumphost_ address.
    * Optional: _Port_ field: The default port for SSH is _**22**_ and this is usually fine.
      However if you encounter a network where port 22 is blocked, you can try port 443. (Normally used for HTTPS, but our Jumposts can use it for SSH too.)
    * 6: _Username_ field: Use your _**account name**_ as you received it by email from the helpdesk (same as for 3).
    * 7: Select _Use SSH key_ and
    * 8: Click the small button to select the _**private key file**_ you generated previously (same as for 4).
      **Important**: the path to the selected private key will be shown.
      Depending on how you browsed to the private key file, the path may
        * Either start with a drive letter, colon and single backslash.
          E.g. ```H:\path\to\private_key.ppk```
          This is fine and should work.
        * Or start with two backslashes.
          E.g. ```\\path\to\private_key.ppk```

>           This won't work and MobaXterm will fail silently: no login, no error, no nothing.

Reviewer: The trailing spaces are optional, but the trailing double spaces were put there explicitly the create line breaks and improve the readability.

Author: reverted

    * You are the only one that ever knew this password; we have no copy/backup whatsoever on the server side.
      If you forgot the password, the private key is useless and you will have to start over by creating a new key pair.

### 1.4 Password again (prompt)

![Configure MobaXterm session](img/MobaXterm9a.png)

MobaXterm should now start a session and login to the _Jumphost_ resulting in

 * a session tab (left part of the window with white background) and
 * a terminal where you can type commands (right part of the screen with black background).

In the terminal tab _**MobaXterm**_ will try to login from the _Jumphost_ to the _User Interface (UI)_ with the same private key file.
This may require retyping the password to decrypt the private key a second time, this time in the terminal tab.

### 1.5 Session established

You have now logged in to the UI {{ groups['user_interface'] | first }}.

![Configure MobaXterm session](img/MobaXterm9b.png)

The left part of the window with white background switched to a file browser,
while the right part remains a terminal where you can type commands.

## 2. Using Windows OpenSSH

### 2.1 Semi-automatic configuration with .bat script

> You can download the executable script from here [logins-windows.bat](../logins-windows.bat) and use it to configure ssh connection for the {{ slurm_cluster_name }}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Download the [logins-windows.bat](../logins-windows.bat) script and use it to configure the SSH connection for {{ slurm_cluster_name | capitalize }}:
```

If you try to download the script with Microsoft Edge (default browser), then

 - Microsoft Edge: **you will twice need to confirm that the file is safe and that your really want to store it** (see Download icon, where you must select `Keep`, then `Show more` > `Keep anyway`)
 - other web browsers: the download itself is easier, but when executing you get `Windows protected` warning, and you must click on `More info` text (small text at top left part of the window), then select `Run anyway`.

>  - alternatively, you can simply click on [the link](../logins-windows.bat), then select all the text, copy and paste into a filename named `logins-windows.bat` (the `.bat` ending is mandatory in order the file to become executable)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 - Using Microsoft's Edge web browser: you will need to confirm that the file is safe **twice**  
   (see _Download_ icon, where you must select `Keep`, then `Show more` > `Keep anyway`)
 - Using other web browsers: the download itself is easier, but when you try to execute the script, you will get a `Windows protected` warning and you must click `More info` (small text at top left part of the window) followed by `Run anyway`.
 - Alternatively, you can simply follow the link [logins-windows.bat](../logins-windows.bat), select & copy the text, then paste into a file named `logins-windows.bat` on your windows machine. (The `.bat` filename extension is mandatory make the file executable.)
```

Once you have the file, run it and the rest of the configuration will be (for except two prompts) done almost automatically.

> The configuration files will be stored inside the `C:\Users\[Username]\.ssh\` folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The configuration files will be stored inside the `%USERPROFILE%\.ssh` folder, which defaults to`C:\Users\[Username]\.ssh\`.
```

Author: While providing % variables _may_ help users who will manually configure the ssh, there is no need to confuse users who will use this .bat semi-automatic installation.

### 2.1 Manual configuration with

(to be updated)

> The ssh configuration files can be created inside the `C:\Users\[Username]\.ssh\` folder. In order to manually create them, you can simply follow the instructions for [linux ssh configuration](../logins-linux-config/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are familiar with he SSH configuration files, and would like to create them manually, you can do that by editing the `%USERPROFILE%\.ssh` folder - which defaults to`C:\Users\[Username]\.ssh\`. Options about SSH configurations are further explained in the instructions for [Linux users](../logins-linux-config/).
```

There are **many** differences between the linux and windows OpenSSH configuration. One of the biggest is the difference beween linux `/` and windows `\` as directory path separator. But there are many more. Users that do not understand those differences, should use the MobaXterm or semi-automatic .bat script options above.

### 2.3 Connecting to the system

> In order to connect to the {{ slurm_cluster_name }}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to connect to {{ slurm_cluster_name | capitalize }}
```

> - first open Start menu, search and execute the `cmd` or `Command Prompt` program
> - login to {{ slurm_cluster_name }} by using a command `ssh umcg-username@{{ groups['jumphost'] | first }}+{{ groups['user_interface'] | first }}`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Open the _Start_ menu, search for `PowerShell` or `cmd` (a.k.a. `Command Prompt`) and then start that application
- Execute `ssh {{ groups['jumphost'] | first }}+{{ groups['user_interface'] | first }}`
```

Reviewer: We do not need username in the SSH command as this is configured with `User %USERNAME%` in the config file, right?

Author: cmd and PoweShell are a programs, not an applications.

> We do not need username in the SSH command as this is configured with User %USERNAME% in the config file, right?

It definitely is not **needed**, but is highly **useful** at establishing the first connection. First user did something wrong and ssh ended up taking automatically default windows username for login. User then didn't noticed there is a `zhk\username` in the output of an error...

In order to do this, user must open another `cmd` environment and establish a connection with numbers of the ports to be forwarded

    ssh -J {{ groups['jumphost'] | first }} {{ groups['user_interface'] | first }} -L XXXXX:NODE:XXXXX

where

- `-J {{ groups['jumphost'] | first }}` specify which jumphost machine is going to be used in order oppening the connection to ...
- `{{ groups['user_interface'] | first }}` is the name of the machine that user will connect and have the command line started
- `-L XXXXX:NODE:XXXXX` defines the ports and machines to connect
    - `XXXXX` can be set to any port in the range (1024 < `XXXXX` <= 65535) as long it is **free** on both (your local and remote) servers,
    - note that this example binds the **same** `XXXXX` ports on both local as well as remote server - but this is not mandatory, they can be different,
    - `NODE` is the name of the remote server behind a jumphsot to which the ports should be forwarded.

More information about `ssh` options can be find on the [ssh man pages](https://man.openbsd.org/ssh).

> ### 2.5 Converting Putty .ppk key into OpenSSH format

Reviewer: If OpenSSH on Windows works well, then I suggest to use OpenSSH also for generating key pairs and drop all MobaXterm references from the documentation.

Author: Later. Currently we are in the process of **testing** if OpenSSH can be even suitable for the entire work. We have so far 1 user that tried it - the one that needed Moba key converted.

Author: added
